---
title: "How NGE changed the way I see storytelling (and why I dropped Sadamoto’s manga version)"
date: 2023-3-29
layout: post
comments: true
---

Neon Genesis Evangelion, the anime that is, is my favorite anime of all time, and perhaps my favorite piece of media of all time. But I didn’t think that way from the start. First time I watched Eva, I thought the worldbuilding and animation were pretty neat but grew frustrated with how much time they spent outside the battlefield, in what amounted to not much other than pretentious powerpoint slides with insufferable dialogue. I wanted to get into mecha anime, and I picked the golden child of mecha anime, yet lo and behold, Hideaki Anno kicked me in the nuts instead! I was pissed, so like any well-adjusted barely-adult, I went on the internet to see how many other people shared my opinion and to relish in their rants.

Then, on a forum, among many other posts of dissatisfaction with the wimpy main character and the nonsensical ending, I saw a take that produced a tectonic shift inside me. Nothing was ever going to be the same, it was a watershed moment. [The amount of hate you have for Shinji is directly proportional to how much see yourself in him].

I got it. Anno did not hold a painting of a turd in front of me, he held a mirror. I was taken aback. Watching the show again, I realized that the way Shinji acted was EXACTLY the way I would’ve acted. All this time, I consumed media as entertainment, I wanted to project myself on the main character, to be Batman or Tony Stark, to be cool and powerful and respected, always with a snarky line to throw back. But why be ashamed of who I was? And if I was ashamed, why never take any steps to change? For the wimp that he was, Shinji managed to at least take the first step, way before I ever did, and that made for a more compelling finale than any apocalyptic battle and a more compelling character than any Marvel hero.

There’s no need to illustrate the brilliance of Eva; countless videos and essays exist just for that on the internet. I went into Eva wanting to get into mecha anime. Instead, Hideaki Anno gave what I truly needed at that point in my life, and I could go as far as to say that I regret I never saw it when I was Shinji’s age, for it might have resonated with me even more. I came to love the fact that Shinji almost made no real progress until the end, not only for how unrealistic it would be to change so much in such a short time but also because I would feel betrayed by him. Shinji was weak and scared, like me, and him going all action hero until the end after I allowed myself to feel a connection through mutual vulnerability, would have felt like a betrayal, like he was living me behind.

Eva has some pretty interesting lore and worldbuilding and a few great action scenes, cool direction, and striking imagery (despite the low budget), yet all of those are secondary to its central character. That’s what makes or breaks Eva, and differentiates it from countless moronic anime with shovel face characters that believe in the inner strength and the power of friendship and the force of will or whatever bullshit.


So why does the manga worries me?

Well, three chapters in, and, while ninety percent of the beats are reproduced from the first episode, the parts that don’t seem to muddy the element that’s the secret sauce of Eva: Shinji. I can already see signs of Sadamoto working on turning Shinji into an assertive, hot-blooded protagonist (also according to other reviews on MAL). In chapter three, after getting inside the Eva, he states that he’s ‘not afraid to die’. Ok? I can understand that Sadamoto did not come from the same place of mental distress and inner examination to Eva as Anno did. I guess his take was to start with a relatively anime-accurate Shinji and transform him into a true hero by the end? I won’t keep reading to find out, sadly it’s a less interesting take on Eva than Anno’s. Hell, not even Anno could recapture the mojo after EoE, on account that he wasn’t the same person in the same place anymore.

It should also be noted that, while very talented in an artistic sense, Sadamoto doesn’t have Anno’s knack for striking visuals, and he can’t visually replicate the slow burn pacing of the anime (not saying it’s impossible, just that Sadamoto wasn’t able/willing to)

So yeah, so far I’m confident in the lore and the worldbuilding, and I guess the story would be more clear as if that’s what will make it better (cue people waiting for a Twin Peaks reboot with no dream sequences and where everything makes sense).
